Sir, introduce yourself and your colleagues, and I will earn your hands.
All right. Oh, tena koe, Mr. Chair, and tena koutou nga member o te komiti
nei. Thank you for the opportunity to be here.
My name's Andrew Goddard. I'm a senior inquiry specialist at the Audit Office,
and I'm here with my colleague, Helen Colebrook, who's our principal inquiry
specialist.
I only want to make a few
introductory remarks about the lessons from our report, Chatham Islands Council
Inquiry into Sensitive Expenditure and Procurement, and then leave as much time for
questions as you want to use.
One area that
we anticipate the committee might be interested in
is our finding that the former chief executive provided
information to our office that we considered to be misleading.
I'm sure the committee would appreciate that we've gone through a careful process
to reach those conclusions, including observing natural justice.
And the committee may also be aware of public reports that the
council has referred those issues to the Serious Fraud Office.
And given that, we are not in a position to say anything further about those
findings than we have said in our report already.
And it's perhaps also worth stressing that none of the comments in our report
or in our remarks today
are a reflection on any of the suppliers that the council engaged.
Our role is limited to the scrutiny of public organizations, and so our focus was
solely on the council.
And in this case, our overall conclusion was that the council did not have adequate
systems to manage sensitive expenditure and procurement effectively.
And in particular, our report sets out our concerns about the management of the
chief executive's house upgrade project, which was overseen by the former chief
executive, and where there were notable delays and cost increases.
Also, direct procurement of consultancy services without proper
documentation, inadequate processes for managing conflicts of interest,
and poor contract management practices.
Finally, a lack of robust oversight of the council's processes
for managing credit card use and reimbursement claims.
And from those, there are three broad thematic points that
I'd like to draw out, and we think these are relevant and useful for any
public organization to reflect on.
And the first is about the importance of aligning policy and practice.
Policies need to be more than just a series of pages.
They need to articulate how the organization actually does its business.
They should reflect the context that public organizations work in, provide
clear and reasonable expectations of its people, and set out practical
processes for managing public money.
And whatever that looks like, it's important that they set organizations
up well to be able to clearly and confidently justify their spending
decisions to the public and to Parliament.
The second point is that effective internal controls are essential for sound
financial management and good governance, including managing risk.
People in governance roles need to regularly monitor the design and
operation of internal controls, for example, by tracking the progress of
significant procurements and ensuring that they're getting regular, clear reporting
about that activity.
And on that point, something that we point out in this report is that
transparent reporting about financial performance is a vital control.
It's really important that public organizations try to identify and address
areas where key financial or performance information might be held by
only a few people or indeed one person.
And the final point we want to highlight today is about
integrity and ethical leadership.
When leaders behave ethically, staff are more likely to be motivated, committed,
and willing to report problems, and the reverse is also true.
Organizational integrity is also critical to maintaining public trust.
And for example, managing conflicts of interest appropriately is a key aspect of
organizational integrity. Now, the Chatham Islands being the
smallest, most remote council in the country, it's inevitable that conflicts
of interest are going to arise, and that in and of itself doesn't mean there has
been any wrongdoing. But the absence of meaningful controls to
manage any conflicts of interest means that risk can materialize
and the perceptions
can be damaged and trust and confidence in the organization can wane.
In terms of where we are now, the council has accepted our findings, and it's been
proactively communicating with us since the report came out.
We're going to continue to monitor its progress, firstly through the annual audit
process, but also through regular check-ins with key staff there.
And another point that we've emphasized in the report, and I think it's worth
saying again today, is that the council really is going to need
ongoing external support from other public organizations
to help it respond to our findings.
And we've been really pleased to see that already there's been public organizations
taking up that call.
In terms of what the committee may wish to do, you might wish to
invite the council to tell you more about how it's responding to our report.
Similarly, there are public organizations you could ask, like the Department of
Internal Affairs, about the support it offers to councils like this.
And if you do want to call anybody else, and we'd of course, be happy to provide
any further support that you might need, as we've done for other committees
when they're looking at our inquiry work.
And I think I will leave it there. Happy to take any questions.
Yeah. Thank you, Andrew. We're going to start with Bob Stevenson.
Oh, thank you. Thank you for those opening comments.
I suppose you'd say it's a pretty damning report, to be honest.
Can you just dive a little bit more into what the council
has undertaken to do with the Audit Office?
Because, again, we might want to dig into some of the specific issues, but I'm
actually interested in what steps are now being taken to address these
major problems that you've uncovered.
You touched on them, but I want to hear a bit more detail about what your role is
going to be overseeing the
improvements.
Sure. So
I suppose
probably the best place to direct any questions about what is happening at the
council-
Yeah
... will be the council itself. But I understand some of the areas that they
are really focused on in the short term are things like
improving their delegations framework, making sure that there are appropriate
authorizations in place for making financial decisions.
But to speak toTo our role, obviously,
given our independence, it's not for us to get granular-
Yeah
... and direct the council to do anything.
But what we've tried to do in this report is set out
a series of questions that the council can use to workshop solutions
for itself, and in consultation with other public organizations.
Yeah.
And so we've got the annual audit process every year.
Our appointed auditor
is working already as part of the
build up to that, and we
have had, and will continue to have,
I think we're looking at quarterly check-ins with the interim chief executive and
then later the permanent chief executive, as well as other key staff, just to
understand what it is, whether it's progress on those delegations matters or other
steps they're taking.
Just a quick follow-up. So would it be your expectation, say if they come up with a
new and more robust conflicts of interest policy, for
example, is it your expectation they would then bring that to the audit
office and say, "Does this meet the findings of the report?"
Or...
I'm not sure necessarily that they'd be asking
us to tick it off as such, but it's the kind of
issue that would be raised during an-
Yeah, and you'd be happy to obviously give them feedback on those kinds of policies
and things that they're going to put in place.
To the extent that it's appropriate for us to do so.
Yeah.
Yes.
Hang on. Thank you.
Thank you. I'm going to go to Tom, then I'll come over to Deborah, and then to you,
David.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. One of the big challenges for the council is their locality,
their remoteness.
You said in your report they had 13 staff, not all of full-time
capacity as well.
Mm.
That obviously presents some challenges for the community and for the council.
What are some of the recommendations you make in that space?
It's a good question, and you're
spot on.
The level of resourcing available to the council as well as the challenges,
increased costs-
Mm
... imposed by its remoteness and the transportation side of things,
is difficult. I suppose that's
why we've
highlighted the need for that external support.
The council, yeah, as I say, at the time we started our inquiry, it had 13 staff.
My understanding is it was less than that by the time we finished.
And so particularly those areas around
additional
assistance on procurement process and assurance processes, that's where I think
we think the external assistance can really come into play and
that's, as I say, why we've really tried to stress that in the report.
It's not just a case of here's the report, council, sort it out.
What else can other public organizations do to get in there as well and help out?
Also, the house upgrade project was quite a significant item
of expenditure,
because it also involved a property that was rented
to the chief executive,
which was part of his employment package.
So I guess I'm keen to know
what has been taken from that around how the
council should manage projects where there is quite a
perception of risk of private benefit, in this case, to the
CEO as part of his employment package, but also because he's going to live there
and then the council is paying for it.
How do you separate, especially on a smaller council with 13 staff,
how do you separate someone like the CEO from being involved in something like
that
when everyone sort of knows everyone?
How do you see that working in the future?
Not necessarily just on the Chatham Islands, but could be anywhere.
I think it's fair to say, the council was
alert to the issues following the report.
The usual thing to do would be to ensure that there's
really good one-up approval and oversight, and in
this case, involving the entire council and having a good
understanding of what was happening within that project, how it was
progressing, why costs were increasing.
Mm.
So there was that visibility
over the expenditure.
You've pointed out that there's a perception risk in
the person managing the project being the person who will benefit from it-
Correct
... ultimately, which is very much why you would want to see some
separation in the person incurring the expenditure,
checking off whether the services have been delivered-
Mm
... let alone deciding is that the best use of council money.
Thank you.
We've got a supplementary from Suze Redmayne.
Yeah.
The chief executive is actually a professional chief
executive as opposed to an elected member, right?
So would you not think that the public should have a level of expectation that
that person would understand conflicts of interest without having to workshop them?
And in particular, in reference to
managing a $500,000 plus
project that he is the sole beneficiary of.
Yeah.
And actually the 500,000, because we don't actually know the other number for the
cost of the alternative accommodation, but I imagine that that stepped up into the
tens of thousands, if not more.
Well, the simple answer on the conflicts of interest point is that all staff in
public organizations should understand their responsibilities to
manage conflicts of interest and what that looks like.
And that's where good policies come into place as well.
If there's a robust policy in place that staff understand,
then
they're in a better position to help to manage that.
But it's correct that-
But are you saying there wasn't one in this instance?
Or there was, but it wasn't adhered to?
There was, but we've found a number of occasions where the
policy wasn't adhered to.
Thank you. Dr. Deborah Russell.
Thank you. It's a very careful report.
I can see where you-
Yes, agreed.
Yeah. Really appreciate that. I
don't quite understand
the structures we've got, because we're using the word council in two senses there.
Is there an elected council as well?
Yes.
Yeah. So there's an elected council. How many people are on that, do you know?
To be hon-- not off the top of my head.
I-
But we're talking 10 people maybe rather than-
I think there or there abouts, yeah
... that sort of thing. Yep. And they're typically
people who live on Chatham Islands?
That's my understanding, yes.
Yeah, okay.
And you've gone on to the fact, I suspect that everyone in the Chathams kind of
knows each other, and so it's a really hard way...
You can't manage conflicts.
We-
And below that, I shouldn't say below that-
16 people
... and then there's the 13 council staff as well, so that's a slightly different
group of people.
Mm.
One there-
I'm just wondering,
the relationship between the chief
executive and the elected council members,
it's a little bit difficult to... It's possibly not the sort of thing in talk
about. Was there a power dynamic there that we're unaware of or...?
That's not a
finding that we've made. And again-
Yeah
... any questions about that sort of relationship are probably best directed to the
council.
Sure.
But certainly, in the chapter of our report where we talk about the
procurement of consultancy services, one of the things we did find was that there
was not
sufficient reporting
on the costs involved in some of that work from the
chief executive upwards-
Up to the council
... up to the council or to its audit and risk committee.
And yeah, in terms of the council then scrutinize, the elected members of the
council scrutinizing Darton, was there enough of that
going on as well? I'm not trying to divert responsibility away from the CEO,
I'm just trying to... It's-
Sure. Again, that's not a matter that we've made a specific
finding on.
Yeah.
But you're touching on a very important point, which is that the relationship
between elected members as the governors of the
council, and then chief executive and other management staff is really
important-
Yeah
... in local organizations, as it is in any public organization.
And that relationship needs to be built on trust.
That's where transparent reporting comes in.
Yeah, it's vital. And also making sure that people understand the difference in
those roles between what is a governance role, what is a management role.
Yeah.
Mm.
Yeah, and there's stuff in your report that I've looked over just going, "Oh my
goodness."
Just going-
So I'm not trying to question anything like that or in terms of the findings.
There's some stuff there which is
just clearly wrong. I guess,
it's possibly
harder in some ways on Anacacho
to get that separation of the council's
elected members scrutinizing
their
staff-
Mm
... in a way that's not quite the case, say, in
on mainland New Zealand where we've typically got better separation.
Again, it's a hard one here because there's obviously personalities
in an organization that small, personalities must come into play in it as well.
Yeah.
It's hard.
Look, it is hard.
Yeah.
I think that's one of the things, and we've tried to really clearly set out at the
start of our report that we recognize that there are particular
challenges that face the Chatham Islands.
Yeah.
And that size question is a really key one.
And so that may well mean that they need to take a
different or a slightly different tailored approach to how they manage those key
issues. But the fundamental principles when it comes to-
I understand
... responsible public expenditure remain the same
I completely agree. Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you. Dr. David Wilson.
Yeah, so I just want to query your statement where you said that
suppliers were not under the auspices or the scope of
what your inquiry was,
which is interesting in itself. But
absolutely understand that you're going to have conflicts of interest in a small
community, but also New Zealand's a small community.
Yeah.
So we have perceived in real conflicts of interest, and the key thing is how you
manage them.
So there is a one-way process that you're looking at was,
were they managed? But also there's coercion and
the opportunity for suppliers to influence or
heavily influence council decisions around
who gets contracted. In this case, we've got,
seemingly to me, the opportunity for that to happen.
So is this now in the auspices of the
SFO
to answer that question? So was there influence from outside of
council for these things to happen?
I suppose any questions about what the SFO is considering, we're not in a
position to answer that. You would have to direct those questions to the Serious
Fraud Office.
Yeah. Short answer is you can't go there.
Essentially, yeah.
Right.
And in terms of our focus on public organizations rather than
suppliers, that comes from the Public Audit Act, where we only have statutory
mandate to look at them.
Yeah. But you can understand the interaction here.
Yeah. The relationship again between public organizations and suppliers is
critical.
Yeah.
And in the issues we've picked up on in this report, what we've really tried to
emphasize is that the council had a responsibility to-
Yep
... put the proper processes in place and manage those contracts appropriately.
And unfortunately, that's not what we saw.
Yeah, because we have another question.
Yeah, even real conflicts of interest can be managed. It's just to be clear.
Yeah.
Just got a sup from Nancy Lou.
I just wanted to quickly understand in your work, but
also in the report, that there is no disclosure
policy for disclosing conflict of interest until the
policy was established late 2024. Is that correct?
Uh-
Policy to disclose on conflict of interest.
That's a
good question. I'm afraid, I don't know.
I can't recall off the top of my head the exact answer.
There were a
variety of policy frameworks and certainly
the council is expected to have those frameworks in place under the Protected
Disclosers Act. So there's a process, but I'm afraid I
can't recallThe exact nature of the policy
Okay, because that was one of the, I think, the highlights that some
media have picked up on, the fact that there was no clear disclosure policy
until
late 2024. Then my question would be, as auditor
in previous years,
were questions ever asked or wondered about the standard policies that
we would expect across public sectors?
I don't know if you have an observation on that.
And then the question-
Yeah
... then the follow-up question would be, if
it is correct that there is no clear disclosure policy requirements
on conflict of interest for the Chatham Islands Council until late
December, late 2024, how confident and
comfortable are we with the disclosure policy requirements for the
other councils around the country?
Mm.
Do we know? Have we done that check?
I think we might have to come back to you on that one through the chair, if that's
all right-
Yes, please
... to provide a more comprehensive answer.
Yes, please.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Thanks. I was going to ask something similar in terms of, obviously,
Nancy raised the question around this issue being reflected potentially in other
councils. But with this particular council, are they on notice
or is there a watcher, observer, and what's the current state of play?
Just to clarify, in terms of...
Well, this is sort of retrospective.
Okay. Yeah.
Where are they at now? I assume
that they're being watched closely as they navigate their way out of this.
Yeah. Well, certainly by us.
As I said, we are going to continue to keep a close watch on
the situation there through both our annual audit process and
as those regular check-ins. In terms
of whether other public organizations are keeping a
close watching eye on this,
might be best placed to direct those questions to them.
For example, the Department of Internal Affairs.
One other question. In terms of debt, a lot of councils
borrow from LGNZ. Was Chatham Islands in that position?
Were they a shareholder and/or borrower of-
Of LGNZ?
Yeah.
I'm afraid I don't know the answer to that question.
Okay. I'm going to go to Tom again for a new primary-
Yeah
... and then back to you, Deborah, to finish.
Yep. Thank you.
Yeah, I think from your report, it also
highlighted that the council
didn't have particularly good record keeping sort of accuracy
or
sort of good processes for tracking what was taking place.
What lessons have they learnt from that, and what's changed?
Again, yes, that's right.
And one of those key findings from our perspective was
the absence of a central contract register so that any staff could
understand what the council had committed to,
and to be able to then check invoicing against that to make sure that they were
paying what had been agreed.
And that's quite a key control.
Again, I'm not in a position to speak about
what specific steps the council has taken to address that finding.
I understand they've got a sequence of priorities they're working
through, but that is exactly the kind of thing that we'll be asking them about in
the coming months.
Have you seen other examples like this from other councils across the
country?
On the contract register point,
it's, I suppose,
it's not uncommon for us to find
in either local government or indeed central government at
times,
that documentation and record keeping isn't where
we would expect it to be in relation to procurement.
It's not a completely isolated case, no.
I guess my question is more so the example of what we're discussing
that transpired here at Chatham Islands, where
someone who had served previously as a mayor,
as a member of parliament,
then became the CEO,
and we then have this issue arise. Are we
seeing similar occurrences of that nature, not necessarily on the same
history of this person,
at other councils around the country?
I think I would be very hesitant to
generalize about other councils.
What we've seen here is
a couple of things go wrong, including the systems and
processes at the council and also, as we
say, some of the actions that we observed were not consistent
with the expectations that Parliament or the public has of public
officials.
Thanks. Dr. Deborah.
And it's quite a specific one this time.
In your report,
the history goes, there was a builder came in from
Christchurch to do the building work because there was no one available on
Rekohu to do that.
Mm.
The original builder finished the work, and then someone else had to come in to do
some final stuff, patch ups. I shouldn't call it
patch up, but final bits. I think the shower had to be reinstalled, something like
that.
Was that just because the first builder was unavailable to come back and do the
final work, or was there some kind of breakdown in the relationship that you know
of?
Or please feel, if you feel you can't say, don't, because I don't want
to trespass into the-
I think part of the picture that we saw was that the scope of work kept
increasing over time, and so the amount of time that the builder had
allocated to being present on the island, and obviously with other jobs backing up
elsewhere-
Yeah
... meant that it came to a point where he had to go off to do his other
work, and other providers were brought in to complete some of
the work and/or do some of the additional work that had been asked
for-
Right. Yeah
... by the chief executive.
So that increasing scope created a few problems there too.
Yeah.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you everyone. Thank you Andrew and Helen.
That seems to be the end of our predictions.
Appreciate your in-depth report and the update to the committee.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
You're welcome.
They've got eight councilors and a mayor, Deborah.
Yeah. Thank you.
And they had someone resign, and then had a by-election in February and nobody
nominated for the position.
Is online, or they-
I know.
600 residents.
I know. It's a-
Okay.
Proportionate representation.
I know. It's one councilor to 60 people, roughly.
You can have a phone tree, couldn't you?
But you can't-
Local democracy, eh?
You can't really have less.
It is no amount of chopping or fixing it's going to change someone who's like that.
No.
Was well aware of people.
Like a Swiss cheese grater.
Most of the organizations I've been on, you declare-
They meet you in the center, mate
...
Just kill me, so like.
But your conflicts are attached-
That's a bit absolute.
That's your story.
Yeah. Absolutely interesting.
No, I was on Sport New Zealand, all listed.
I agree.
All
right. Hi, welcome. Please take a seat.
Hi. Thank you.
The policy, but it's an individual issue, isn't
it?
Yeah.
Welcome, Lucy and Simon. Great to have you here.
We've got you for up to 10 minutes. Please take your report largely as read, just
to allow some time for questions, but feel free to offer up some preamble
comments.
Okay. Sounds good. So, Lucy Cooper. Nice.
Hi.
And Simon Peat. We're both partners in the Competition and Regulatory Department at
Chapman Tripp. I think we're just going to make a couple of comments about our
submission, so I'll let Simon start.
So the first point that we wanted to highlight is around the
objectives and functions of the commission.
So,
we support the proposal and the bill to codify the objectives
and functions of the commission. We think that makes sense.
But we have concerns with two of the functions that are
being included in the bill.
As we understood it, the intent of cabinet was that these provisions
should largely codify the existing functions of the commission rather than create
new functions. But in our view, two of those
functions actually go further. So, the first is
the proposal that the commission's functions would include issuing warnings,
reports, guidelines, or otherwise commenting on, "Any matter
relating to competition," whether in relation to individual entities or more
generally.
And our concern is that the commission is primarily a body that enforces New
Zealand's competition rules, and it is important for businesses to have
certainty about what those rules are,
so that they can have confidence in
operating within markets.
The suggestion that the commission has a role in just commenting generally
on things that it sees in markets which it might like or not like,
creates a lot of uncertainty for businesses.
There's a suggestion that that is the commission using the coercive power
of the state to just intervene when it sees things that it just doesn't
like the look of. And we think that that goes further than the commission's
appointed role, and has the potential to create a lot of uncertainty
for New Zealand's business community in a way that
is unnecessary given that Parliament has already decided what New
Zealand's competition laws ought to be.
The second function that we have some concerns about is
the role in, "Keeping the operation of commerce
legislation under review."
It's not entirely clear what that means, but again, because the commission's
primary role is as an enforcer of New Zealand's competition laws, we have
some concerns with the idea that the commission would also have a formal
role in saying what those laws ought to be from time to time,
or whether they're functioning in the way that is intended.
It's the role of Parliament
and with policy support from officials to decide what New Zealand's
competition laws ought to be, and then the Commerce Commission's role is
to enforce those laws. So we have a concern that
blurring those rules is inviting the body that enforces the laws to also have a
hand in writing them.
And we think that those roles should be kept functionally
distinct, and that's an important feature of our current regime.
That's all that I was proposing to say on those matters.
Okay, so I'll just make a couple of points on the changes to the commission's
structure that the bill brings in.
So first of all, we really support the main goal of the
changes to the structure, which is obviously separating the regulatory
decision-making functions from the governance functions of the commission.
That's a really good goal.
Our concern is really that for this first period of the bill's
operations, so through to the middle of 2030, it
would do the exact opposite of that, and it would actually
concentrate the regulatory decision-making and governance functions of the
commission.
So it does that by making the current chair of the commission
continue to be the chair of the commission and be the chief regulatory
decision-maker.
Now, we also support the priority that has been put
on keeping the current commissioners in their jobs for the term they've been
appointed. We agree that there's no reason to disrupt that, and there
was no criticism of the current commissioners in the report.
But that doesn't seem to gel with needing to
increase or concentrate those roles further.
You could achieve the same outcome of preserving those people's
roles and continuing to make use of their expertise by
just simply asking the chair to choose between being the head of the governance
function and the head of the regulatory decision-making function.
As it stands, it's asking him to do both, and that's doing the
exact opposite of what the bill was setting out to do, and it's
doing it for quite a long period, right through to the middle of 2030.
So it's going to take a long time for these goals to be realized.
So I think that's probably the key point that we wanted to make, thatThe other one
on structure was just when we think about the
expertise that's within the commission.
There are some extremely expert staff members who've
been in the role for a long time and have built up this huge knowledge and
expertise about our competition laws and the related
legislation that the commission deals with.
I understand that the new regulatory, the decision-making panels
will be allowed to have staff members on them.
And I guess whether or not it's in the bill, I think we would really support
and think it's a good idea to make sure that wherever possible there are
staff members contributing at the decision-making level.
That's making the best use of the expertise that already exists in the
system.
So those were the only two points I was proposing to make, but please feel free to
ask questions.
Thanks. I'll just kick off with one quickly.
I notice in your report towards the end, you talk about the accountability, about
the, I suppose, transparency in decision-making, which has been a theme which came
up from some other submitters.
So that's something that you see as currently lacking, and also the speed of
decision-making in terms of make a decision and then the transparency of how
that decision was arrived at. Is that something you'd like to see
embedded in the new regime?
I think to frame it slightly in the point we were making earlier, we think it's
important that the commission makes decisions that are evidence-based and follow a
proper process in which all of the affected participants have an
appropriate opportunity to participate.
And the
commission can speak to this themselves, but I think that they have
tried to use their powers more flexibly
in the recent past. I think some of the additional functions as proposed
they'd be provided with here would give them even more flexibility to-
You're being very polite, aren't you?
I'm being deliberately polite.
Yeah.
But we
think it is important that the way that New Zealand's competition laws are
enforced is via
structured evidence-based processes where participants can provide
evidence and engage in a process and be assured that their views are heard.
Mm-hmm.
And that requires a degree of structure and formality to
decision-making, and I think that that is an important part of how the
commission makes decisions.
Yeah.
Yeah, and there's that process part of it, and then
there's also this
keeping information confidential part of it.
Now,
we understand that there's a balance to be struck there, and it's important that
the commission can gather the evidence
that it needs.
It is of critical importance that when a decision is made about
someone or adverse to someone, that
they or at least their advisors are able to see the
evidence that's been compiled against them.
And there's some challenges, I think, in that OIA
confidentiality part of the bill,
of the substantive bill that we are worried about.
Okay.
Yeah.
Thank you. Dr. David Wilson.
You made some comments about the commission of being the person that has
maybe too much influence over the regulatory boards or
panels that they put together.
So that's a good governance
notion that you're putting in front of us, but you would also expect that the
commissioner will have had the discussion with the other commissioners
about what the approach should be and what they should be looking for at one point.
Second point,
how the commissioners, if you're going to run that governance
level of observation over the whole organization,
can you provide comment on how you believe whether or not the
commissioners themselves have been through a process that is fair, and we're going
to get the best outcome in terms of the chair and the commissioners?
So two questions there, but related. It's about governance.
Do you mean in terms of how they were appointed?
Yes.
Or-
Yes. No comments or carry on?
I don't think we have a view on
how they're appointed.
Something that we do think is important is to recognize
that the institutional capability of the Commerce Commission lies in the
institution itself and its senior staff.
So the commission structure was created in 1986, and initially it was just
some external people that were appointed and supported by a secretariat, and the
idea was that these sort of externals would have the
personal experience and knowledge and expertise to be able to make these decisions.
This area of the law has been professionalized over the subsequent decades.
It is the organization that contains the expertise and
experience to support the decision-making.
So, we think obviously there's a role for commissioners, and how
they're appointed in their governance role is important.
But from our perspective, part of the benefit of these reforms
is utilizing the expertise of the
institution to support that decision-making, as opposed to just
leaning too heavily on periodically appointed external
commissioners to do all the thinking and make all the decisions.
That's a very anachronistic approach to making decisions in an area
which has over the years been professionalized.
But they are in a position of governance, correct?
Well, currently they have both effectively governance responsibilities
and decision-making responsibilities.
Yeah, no, we understand that, and I agree, but I'm saying there's
levels here of governance and
if we're going to get this consistency across that we can have
trust in the commissioner,
and what you're saying is actually no, that's the wrong way of deciding who's
on the regulatory panels. So what's the alternative?
I'm not sure I understand the question.
That's what I heard.
That you were unsure of the commissioner being the person that had the influence
over who was on the regulatory boards.
I think what we're saying is at the
moment-You have your divisions of three commissioners
making regulatory decisions. In future, you would
have, and I think the bill provides for this, is that you would have
more likely two,
and then have an external appointee, and that external
appointee could be an expert from outside of the commission or it
could be a commission staff member.
I don't think we are opposed to continuing to have
commissioners in regulatory decision-making roles.
We just do support the addition of staff
expertise and/or external expertise to that panel.
So you're still okay with the commissioner choosing who's on the regulatory panels?
I mean, somebody has to do that, and that seems like the appropriate place to-
Okay. Well, I misunderstood what you said then.
Yeah. Maybe. Yeah.
Okay.
Yes, we're okay with that.
Yeah. Thank you, Lucy and Simon. Really appreciate your very clarifying comments
and submissions. So,
really appreciate you coming in today.
Thanks for having us.
Thank you, Lucy.
We've got Tex Edwards, Monopoly Watch, I believe.
Is he beaming in?
Yeah. He's online.
Online. You're welcome to stay or if you want to watch
online.
G'day, Tex.
G'day. How you doing?
We can hear you, we just can't see you.
So a lot of people would say that's a good thing, but
I got it possibly for you.
I've unhooked the video, but,
I can't see what the issue here is.
Have a go. If not-
Push on
... we'll carry on anyway. We've got just about nine and a half minutes to go,
so-
Yeah
... please, yeah, have some time for questions.
100%.
There we go.
There you go.
We're on. Okay, fantastic. Look, thanks for making time for me, and thanks for
indulging me in this submission.
I've got a few points to make, and then we'll rip into questions if
that works for the committee.
Yeah.
Look, I think we need to highlight some of the previous
presentation from Chapman Tripp.
What's wrong with the rules here is that they're not disclosing who
they're working for. They work for Foodstuffs, Mercury,
Genesis, ANZ, and they're pretending to be legal
experts. Essentially, they're working as lobbyists here, and this
process
has been skewed by lobbyist influence swamping.
It's really strategic, and it's one of our thrust points here that we were
never consulted
on this bill,
that this review by the Rebstock group.
And that's fine,
but there was nobody in the consumer engine room
who was familiar with capital-intensive
industries and could make a meaningful submission.
That's point one. Point two is this
amendment should actually be called the Fixing Broken Markets
Amendment, because that's what's required.
For you as committee members, as members of the select committee,
you're meant to be fixing these broken markets.
Essentially, we have an academic rearrangement of chaos
here, and in my mind, it's not okay and it
won't achieve the objective
that this committee has set out to fix.
It's important that we look at the benchmark numbers on some of
our major industries, and it's important that when you're reviewing the
Commerce Commission, that the Rebstock report should've quantified the
requirement for extra financial expertise inside the Commerce
Commission.
And it's really a point of concern with Monopoly
Watch that the
financial literacy of where monopoly rents are hidden,
how special dividends and capital buybacks occur,
and some of the financial structures of these major problematic industries,
that expertise isn't being injected into the Commerce Commission,
and I urge the committee to rethink that through.
I think you're
also not looking at the dynamic about market power.
Market power is this ability to pocket price,
have a subscriber acquisition cost war, i.e.
give cash backs as a bank, or capture
an unreasonable amount of personal data in a supermarket
context.
And,
I think that this bill would be better
for consumers in New Zealand if there was some real material
discussion of how market power is handled.
The other thing it doesn't do is it doesn't review some of the
historical market mergers, which I'm sure that most of the
committee when you're grabbing a water later will agree
that some of the mergers that have occurred in the last 15, 20
years, they're the major problems, and this Amendment Act
isn't fixing them.
And I'll close off before questions saying that, look,
poor old Commerce Commission has had a review here, and it's
sensible to review competition law, and there are some sensible points
around the structure and the governance of that commission
in the bill. I think it's really important that the
Commerce Commission, not the Parliament, which conflicts with the
lobbyist's comment previous to me, that the
Commerce Commission are the subject matter experts, that they
make the decision on how the law should be crafted.
If we defer to Parliament, then we get swamped with
lobbyist influence.And poor old
ComCom, they're being reviewed here.
Why wouldn't we do the same
on the MB?
MB sets these major industry
policies.
It has a major influence on how the supermarket ecosystem works, how
banks work, how building materials work, how insurance works, how banks work.
And,
the MB seem to be happy that the country's working,
so all things are okay. Their sensitivity to
competition settings are erroneous, and so I suggest a
review there. Are there any questions?
Yeah. Thanks, Tex. We've got one from Dr. David Wilson.
Yeah. Thanks, Tex. You opened up by saying that the commission
itself needs extra financial expertise in the commission, which I think is an
interesting observation. But really what I want to do is touch on what
you were just talking about, the structure of this, and in
particular, I had some questions for the previous submitters
around the governance.
So we've got governance on one side, operations on the other.
We're trying to strike a balance here, and I'm gathering you're in favor of
strengthening the Commission to get better outcomes.
So, you can answer in that context.
Well, thank you for that, David.
The issue is that
expertise needs to sit into the Commerce Commission.
We can't expect parliamentarians or generalists to understand the
financial mutae of how a bank works, how a bank's
regulated, how a bank maintains its market share,
how lobbyists influence swamp government committees.
And,
telecommunications is arguably the best reason.
We don't expect politicians to walk around Wellington
discussing cell tower co-location, spectrum interference, interconnection,
number portability, software integration.
These are specialist subject matters.
And,
if we looked at supermarkets, there is a lot of complexity in fresh and
frozen and equivalent
infrastructure basis, the impact of scale,
the abuse of market power through digital footprints.
And so absolutely, it's the case for the Commission
to increase its skill base and
have industry specialists in fixing these broken markets.
And it's noteworthy that the Commission
doesn't have the power to conduct its own
market studies,
most of which have been an outrageous success for consumers because they've
anchored such substantial issues at a level of
detail and a level of sophistication which is possibly better than
Australia.
Thank you. Any other questions?
Yeah, supplementary, Tex, and the governance level,
how do you think about fitting in the architecture?
Governance level, it's time, and it's a crisis because we've seen
that lobbyist catastrophe in the news yesterday.
It's time to allow the Commerce Commission
to be independent like the central bank,
and that sits in the framework with other OECD
countries, and this legislation
proposed doesn't do that. It doesn't allow the Commerce Commission to be
independent, similar to the central bank, and
no need to listen to Tex Edwards from Monopoly Watch, although we are subject
matter experts. If we looked at the OECD in our benchmark
countries, we would find out that that's the case in other
jurisdictions.
Hey, thanks, Tex. We're going to have to leave it there for time.
Appreciate your submission and also for your recommendations 10 and
11 are worthy as well, so we'll pick that up.
But thanks again for joining in.
Thank you for considering the position. Cheers.